{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf200
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\
In which Adso goes hunting for truffles and sees the Minorites arriving they\
\
confer at length with William and Ubertino,\
about John XXII.\
\
and very sad things are learned\
\
\
After these considerations my master decided to proceed no further. I have already said that he occasionally had moments of total inactivity, as if the ceaseless cycle of the stars had stopped, and he\
with it and with them. And so it was that morning. He stretched out on his pallet, staring into the void, his hands folded on his chest, barely moving his lips, as if he were reciting a prayer, but\
irregularly and without devotion.\
I thought he was thinking, and I resolved to respect his meditation. I returned to the courtyard\
and saw that the sun had grown weaker. Beautiful and clear as it had been, the morning (as the day approached the completion of its first half) was becoming damp and misty. Heavy clouds moved\
from the north and were invading the top of the mountain, covering it with a light brume. It seemed to be fog, and perhaps fog was also rising from the round, but at that altitude it was difficult to\
distinguish the mists that rose from below and those that came down from above. It was becoming hard to discern the bulk of the more distant buildings.\
  I saw Severinus gaily assembling the swineherds and some of their animals. He told me he was going to descend along the mountain slopes, and into the valley, to hunt for truffles. I wasn\'92t\
familiar with that choice fruit of the underbrush, which was found in the peninsula and seemed typical especially of the Benedictine domains, whether at Norcia\'97the black ones\'97or in these\
lands\'97the white and more aromatic. Severinus explained to me what a truffle was, and how tasty, when prepared in the most diverse ways. And he told me it was very difficult to find, because it was\
hidden underground, more secret than a mushroom, and the only animals capable of unearthing it were pigs, following their smell. But on finding it they wanted to devour it themselves, and they had\
to be chased off at once, so that you could step in and dig up the truffle. I learned later that many lords did not disdain to join this hunt, following the pigs as if they were noblest hounds, and\
followed, in turn, by servants with hoes. I remember, indeed, that in later years a lord of my country, knowing I was acquainted with Italy, asked me why, as he had seen down there, some lords went out\
to pasture their pigs; and I laughed, realizing that, on the contrary, they were going in search of truffles. But when I told him that these lords hoped to find the \'93truffle\'94 underground,. to eat it, he\
thought I had said they were seeking \'93der Teufel,\'94 the Devil, and he blessed himself devoutly, looking at me in amazement. Then the misunderstanding was cleared up and we both laughed at it.\
Such is the magic of human languages, that by human accord often the same sounds mean different things.\
  My curiosity aroused by Severinus\'92s preparations, I decided to follow him, also because I realized he was turning to this hunt in order to forget the sad events that oppressed everyone; and I thought\
that in helping him to forget his thoughts I would perhaps, if not forget, at least restrain my own. Nor will I deny, since I have determined to write always and only the truth, that I was secretly lured\
by the idea that, down in the valley, I might perhaps glimpse someone I will not mention. But to myself and almost aloud I declared that, since the two legations were expected to arrive that day, I might perhaps sight one of them.\
As we gradually descended the curves of the mountain, the air became clearer. Not that the sun\
returned, for the upper part of the sky was heavy with clouds, but things stood out sharply, even as\
\
\
\
\
\
the fog remained above our heads. Indeed, when we had gone some distance, I turned to look up at the top of the mountain and could no longer see anything. From the halfway point upward, the\
summit, the high plain, the Aedificium\'97everything had disappeared among the clouds.\
  The morning of our arrival, when we were already among the mountains, at certain bends it was still possible to view the sea, no more than ten miles away, perhaps even less. Our journey had been\
rich in surprises, because suddenly we would find ourselves on a kind of terrace in the mountain, which fell sharply down to beautiful bays, and then a little later we would enter deep chasms, where\
mountains rose among mountains, and one blocked from another the sight of the distant shore, while the sun could hardly force its way into the deep valleys. Never before had I seen, as I saw in\
that part of Italy, such narrow and sudden juttings of sea and mountains, of shores followed by alpine landscapes, and in the wind that whistled among the gorges you could catch the alternate\
conflict of the marine balms with icy mountain gusts.\
That morning, however, all was gray, almost milky white, and there were no horizons even when\
the gorges opened out toward the distant shores. But I am dwelling on recollections of little interest as far as our story goes, my patient reader. So I will not narrate the ups and downs of our search for\
\'93der Teufel,\'94 and I will tell, rather, of the legation of Friars Minor, which I was the first to sight. I ran at once to the monastery to inform William.\
  My master waited till the newcomers had entered and been greeted by the abbot according to the ritual. Then he went to meet the group, and there was a series, of fraternal embraces and salutations.\
  The meal hour had already passed, but a table had been set for the guests, and the abbot thoughtfully left us among them; alone with William, exempted from the obligations of the Rule,\
they were free to eat and at the same time exchange their impressions. After all, it was, God forgive me the unpleasant simile, like a council of war, to be held as quickly as possible before the enemy\
host, namely the Avignon legation, could arrive.\
Needless to say, the newcomers also promptly met Ubertino, whom all greeted with surprise, joy,\
veneration inspired not only by his long absence and by the fears surrounding his disappearance, but also by the qualities of that courageous warrior who for decades had fought their same battle.\
  Of the friars that made up the group I will speak later, when I tell about the next day\'92s meeting. For that matter, I talked very little with them at first, involved as I was in the three-man conference\
promptly established between William, Ubertino, and Michael of Cesena.\
Michael must have been a truly strange man: most ardent in his Franciscan passion (he had at\
times the gestures, the accents of Ubertino in his moments of mystical transport); very human and jovial in his earthly nature, a man of the Romagna, capable of appreciating a good table and happy to\
be among his friends. Subtle and evasive, he could abruptly become sly and clever as a fox, elusive as a  mole, when  problems  of  relations  among  the mighty were  touched  upon;  capable  of  great\
outbursts of laughter, fervid tensions, eloquent silences, deft in turning his gaze away from his interlocutor if the latter\'92s question required him to conceal, with what seemed absent-mindedness,\
his refusal to reply.\
I have already spoken a bit about him in the preceding pages, and those were things I had heard\
said, perhaps by persons to whom they had been said. Now, on the other hand, I understood better many of his contradictory attitudes and the sudden changes of political strategy that in recent years\
had amazed his own friends and followers. Minister, general of the order of the Friars Minor, he was in principle the heir of Saint Francis, and actually the heir of his interpreters: he had to compete with\
the sanctity and wisdom of such a predecessor as Bonaventure of Bagnoregio; he had to assure respect for the Rule and, at the same time, the fortunes of the order, so powerful and vast; he had to keep an eye on the courts and on the city magistrates from whom the order, though in the guise of alms, received gifts and bequests, source of prosperity and wealth; and at the same time he had to make sure that the requirement of penance did not lead the more ardent Spirituals to abandon the\
\
\
\
\
\
order, scattering that splendid community of which he was the head, in a constellation of bands of heretics. He had to please the Pope, the Emperor, the Friars of the Poor Life, and Saint Francis,\
who was certainly watching over him from heaven, as well as the Christian people, who were\
watching him from the earth. When John had condemned all Spirituals as heretics, Michael had not hesitated to hand over to him five of the most unruly friars of Provence, allowing the Pontiff to\
burn them at the stake. But realizing (and Ubertino may have had some share in this) that many in the order sympathized with the followers of evangelical simplicity, Michael had then acted in such a\
way that the chapter of Perugia, four years later, took up the demands of the burned men, naturally trying to reconcile a need, which could be heretical, with the ways and institutions of the order, and\
trying to harmonize the desires of the order and those of the Pope. But, as Michael was busy convincing the Pope, without whose consent he would have been unable to proceed, he had been\
willing also to accept the favors of the Emperor and the imperial theologians. Two years before the day I saw him he had yet enjoined his monks, in the chapter general of Lyons, to speak of the Pope\'92s\
person only with moderation and, respect (and this was just a few months after the Pope, referring to the Minorites, had complained of their yelping, their errors, their insanities\'94). But here he was at\
table, friendly, with persons who spoke of the Pope with less than no respect.\
I have already told the rest of the story. John wanted him at Avignon. He himself wanted and did\
not want to go, and the next day\'92s meeting was to decide on the form and guarantees of a journey that should not appear as an act of submission or as an act of defiance. I don\'92t believe Michael had\
ever met John personally, at least not as pope. In any event, he hadn\'92t seen him for a long time, and Michael\'92s friends hastened to paint the portrait of that simoniac in the darkest hues.\
  \'93One thing you must learn,\'94 William said to him, \'93is never to trust his oaths, which he always maintains to the letter, violating their substance.\'94\
\'93Everyone knows,\'94 Ubertino said, \'93what happened at the time of his election. ...\'94\
\'93I wouldn\'92t call it an election, but an imposition!\'94 one man at the table cried, a man I later heard\
them call Hugh of Newcastle, whose accent was similar to my master\'92s. \'93For that matter, the death of Clement the Fifth itself was never very clear. The King had never forgiven him for having\
promised to try Boniface the Eighth posthumously and then doing everything he could to avoid repudiating his predecessor. Nobody really knows how Clement died, at Carpentras. The fact is that\
when the cardinals met in Carpentras for the conclave, the new Pope didn\'92t materialize, because (quite rightly) the argument shifted to the choice between Avignon and Rome. I don\'92t know exactly\
what happened at that time\'97it was a massacre, I\'92m told\'97with the cardinals threatened by the nephew of the dead Pope, their servants slaughtered, the palace set afire, the cardinals appealing to\
the King, who says he never wanted the Pope to desert Rome and they should be patient and make a good choice. ... Then Philip the Fair died, again God only knows how. \'85\'94\
\'93Or the Devil knows,\'94 Ubertino said, blessing himself, in which he was imitated by all the others. \'93Or the Devil knows,\'94 Hugh agreed, with a sneer. \'93Anyway, another king succeeds, survives\
eighteen months, and dies. His newborn heir also dies in a few days\'92 time, and the regent, the King\'92s brother, assumes the throne. \'85\'94\
  \'93And this is Philip the Fifth. The very one who, when he was still Count of Poitiers, stopped the cardinals who were fleeing from Carpentras,\'94 Michael said.\
  \'93Yes,\'94 Hugh went on. \'93He puts them again into conclave in Lyons, in the Dominicans\'92 convent, swearing he will defend their safety and not keep them prisoner. But once they place themselves in\
his power, he does not just have them locked up (which is the custom, after all), but every day reduces their food until they come to a decision. And each one promises to support his claim to the throne. When he does assume the throne, the cardinals are so weary of being prisoners after two years, and so afraid of staying there for the rest of their lives, eating badly, that they agree to\
\
\
\
\
\
everything, the gluttons, and on the throne of Peter they put that gnome, who is now over seventy.\
\'85\'94\
\'93Gnome, yes, true,\'94 Ubertino said, laughing. \'93And rather consumptive-looking, but stronger and\
shrewder than anyone thought!\'94\
\'93Son of a cobbler,\'94 one of the legates grumbled.\
  \'93Christ was the son of a carpenter,\'94 Ubertino reproached him. \'93That is not the point. He is a cultivated man, he studied law at Montpellier and medicine in Paris, he cultivated his friendships in\
the ways best suited to win the episcopal seats and the cardinal\'92s hat when it seemed opportune to him, and as counselor of Robert the Wise in Naples he amazed many with his acumen. When\
Bishop of Avignon, he gave all the right advice (right, that is, for the outcome of that squalid venture) to Philip the Fair about how to ruin the Templars. And after his election he managed to foil\
a plot of cardinals who wanted to kill him. ... But this is not what I meant to talk about: I was speaking of his ability to betray vows without being accused of swearing falsely. To be elected, he\
promised Cardinal Orsini he would return the papal seat to Rome, and when he was elected he swore on the consecrated host that if he were not to keep his promise, he would never mount a\
horse or a mule again. Well, you know what that fox did? After he had himself crowned in Lyons (against the will of the King, who wanted the ceremony to take place in Avignon), he traveled from\
Lyons to Avignon by boat!\'94\
The monks all laughed. The Pope was a perjurer, but there was no denying he had a certain\
ingeniousness.\
\'93He is without shame,\'94 William remarked. \'93Didn\'92t Hugh say that John made no attempt to\
conceal his bad faith? Haven\'92t you, Ubertino, told about what he said to Orsini on the day of his arrival in Avignon?\'94\
  \'93To be sure,\'94 Ubertino said. \'93He said to him that the sky of France was so beautiful he could not see why he should set foot in a city full of ruins, like Rome. And inasmuch as the Pope, like Peter,\
had the power to bind and to loosen, he was now exercising this power: and he decided to remain where he was, where he enjoyed being. And when Orsini tried to remind him that it was his duty to\
live on the Vatican hill, he recalled him sharply to obedience and broke off the discussion. But I have not finished the story of the oath. On disembarking from the boat, John was to have mounted\
a white horse, to be followed by the cardinals on black horses, according to tradition. Instead he went to the episcopal palace on foot. Nor have I ever heard of his riding a horse again. And this is\
the man, Michael, you expect to abide by the guarantees he will give you?\'94\
Michael remained silent for a long time. Then he said, \'93I can understand the Pope\'92s wish to\
remain in Avignon, and I will not dispute it. But he cannot dispute our desire for poverty and our interpretation of the example of Christ.\'94\
  \'93Don\'92t be ingenuous, Michael,\'94 William spoke up, \'93your wishes, ours, make his appear sinister. You must realize that for centuries a greedier man has never ascended the papal throne. The whore\
of Babylon against whom our Ubertino used to fulminate, the corrupt popes described by the poets of your country, like that Alighieri, were meek lambs and sober compared to John. He is a thieving\
magpie, a Jewish usurer; in Avignon there is more trafficking than in Florence! I have learned of the ignoble transaction with Clement\'92s nephew, Bertrand of Goth, he of the slaughter of Carpentras\
(during which, incidentally, the cardinals were relieved of all their jewels). He had laid his hands on his uncle\'92s treasure, which was no trifle, and John had not overlooked anything Bertrand had stolen:\
to the Cum venerabiles John lists precisely the coins, the gold and silver vessels, the books, rugs, precious stones, ornaments. ... John, however, pretended not to know that Bertrand had seized more than a million and a half gold florins during the sack of Carpentras; he questioned another thirty thousand florins Bertrand confessed he had received from his uncle for a \'91pious cause,\'92 namely for a crusade. It was agreed that Bertrand would keep half the sum for the crusade and donate the other\
\
\
\
\
\
half to the papal throne. Then Bertrand never made the crusade, or at least he has not made it yet, and the Pope has not seen a florin. ...\'94\
\'93He is not so clever, then,\'94 Michael remarked.\
  \'93That was the only time he has been outwitted in a matter of money,\'94 Ubertino said. \'93You must know well the kind of tradesman you will be dealing with. In every other situation he has displayed a\
diabolical skill in collecting money. He is a Midas: everything he touches becomes gold and flows into the coffers of Avignon. Whenever I entered his apartments I found bankers, moneychangers,\
and tables laden with gold, clerics counting florins and piling them neatly one on top of another. ... And you will see the palace he has had built for himself, with riches that were once attributed only to\
the Emperor of Byzantium or the Great Khan of the Tartars. And now you understand why he issued  all  those  bulls  against  the  ideal  of  poverty.  But  do  you  know  that  he  has  driven  the\
Dominicans, to their hatred of our order, to carve statues of Christ with a royal crown, a tunic of purple and gold, and sumptuous sandals? In Avignon they display crucifixes where Christ is nailed\
by a single hand while the other touches a purse hanging from his belt, to indicate that he authorizes the use of money for religious ends. ...\'94\
\'93Oh, how shameless!\'94 Michael cried. \'93But this is outright blasphemy!\'94\
\'93He has added,\'94 William went on, \'93a third crown to the papal tiara, hasn\'92t he, Ubertino?\'94\
  \'93Certainly. At the beginning of the millennium Pope Hildebrand had assumed one, with the legend \'91Corona regni de manu Dei\'92; the infamous Boniface later added a second, writing on it\
\'91Diadema imperii de manu Petri\'92; and John has simply perfected the symbol: three crowns, the spiritual power, the temporal, and the ecclesiastical. A symbol worthy of the Persian kings, a pagan\
symbol ...\'94\
There was one monk who till then had remained silent, busily and devoutly consuming the good\
dishes the abbot had sent to the table. With an absent eye he followed the various discussions, emitting every now and then a sarcastic laugh at the Pope\'92s expense, or a grunt of approval at the\
other monks\'92 indignant exclamations. But otherwise he was intent on wiping from his chin the juices and bits of meat that escaped his toothless but voracious mouth, and the only times he had spoken a\
word to one of his neighbors were to praise some delicacy. I learned later that he was Master Jerome, that Bishop of Kaffa whom, a few days before, Ubertino had thought dead. (I must add that\
the news of his death two years earlier continued to circulate as the truth throughout Christendom for a long time, because I also heard it afterward. Actually, he died a few months after that meeting\
of ours, and I still think he died of the great anger that filled him at the next day\'92s meeting; I would almost believe he exploded at once, so fragile was he of body and so bilious of humor.)\
  At this point he intervened in the discussion, speaking with his mouth full: \'93And then, you know, the villain issued a constitution concerning the taxae sacrae poenitentiariae in which he exploits the\
sins of religious in order to squeeze out more money. If an ecclesiastic commits a carnal sin, with a nun, with a relative, or even with an ordinary woman (because this also happens!), he can be\
absolved only by paying sixty-seven gold pieces and twelve pence. And if he commits bestiality,. it is more than two hundred pieces, but if he has committed it only with youths or animals, and not with\
females, the fine is reduced by one hundred. And a nun who has given herself to many men, either all at once or at different times, inside the convent or out, if she then wants to become abbess, must\
pay one hundred thirty-one gold pieces and fifteen pence. ...\'94\
\'93Come, come, Messer Jerome,\'94 Ubertino protested, \'93you know how little I love the Pope, but on\
this  point  I  must  defend  him!  It  is  a  slander  circulated  in  Avignon.  I  have  never  seen  this constitution!\'94\
\'93It exists,\'94 Jerome declared vigorously. \'93I have not seen it, either, but it exists.\'94\
Ubertino shook his head, and the others fell silent. I realized they were accustomed to not paying\
great heed to Master Jerome, whom William had called a fool the other day. William tried to resume\
\
\
\
\
\
the conversation: \'93In any case, true or false as it may be, this rumor tells us the moral climate of Avignon, where all, exploited and exploiters, know they are living more in a market than at the court\
of Christ\'92s vicar. When John ascended the throne there was talk of a treasure of seventy thousand\
florins and now there are those who say he has amassed more than ten million.\'94\
\'93It is true,\'94 Ubertino said. \'93Ah, Michael, Michael, you have no idea of the shameful things I had\
to see in Avignon!\'94\
\'93Let us try to be honest,\'94 Michael said. \'93We know that our own people have also committed\
excesses. I have been told of Franciscans who made armed attacks on Dominican convents and despoiled their rival monks to impose poverty on them. ... This is why I dared not oppose John at\
the time of the events in Provence. ... I want to come to an agreement with him; I will not humiliate his pride, I will only ask him not to humiliate our humility. I will not speak to him of money, I will\
ask him only to agree to a sound interpretation of Scripture. And this is what we must do with his envoys tomorrow. After all, they are men of theology, and not all will be greedy like John. When\
some wise men have determined an interpretation of Scripture, he will not be able to\'97\'94\
\'93He?\'94 Ubertino interrupted him. \'93Why, you do not yet know his follies in the field of theology!\
He really wants to bind everything with his own hand, on earth and in heaven. On earth we have seen what he does. As for heaven ... Well, he has not yet expressed the ideas I cannot divulge to\
you\'97not publicly, at least\'97but I know for certain that he has whispered them to his henchmen. He is planning some mad if not perverse propositions that would change the very substance of doctrine\
and would deprive our preaching of all power!\'94 \'93What are they?\'94 many asked.\
  \'93Ask Berengar; he knows, he told me of them.\'94 Ubertino had turned to Berengar Talloni, who over the past years had been one of the most determined adversaries of the Pope at his own court.\
Having come from Avignon, he had joined the group of the other Franciscans two days earlier and had arrived at the abbey with them.\
  \'93It is a murky and almost incredible story,\'94 Berengar said. \'93It seems John is planning to declare that the just will not enjoy the beatific vision until after judgment. For some time he has been\
reflecting on the ninth verse of the sixth chapter of the Apocalypse, where the opening of the fifth seal is discussed, where under the altar appear those who were slain for testifying to the word of\
God and who ask for justice. To each is given a white robe, and they are told to be patient a little longer. ... A sign, John argues, that they will not be able to see God in his essence until the last\
judgment is fulfilled.\'94\
\'93To whom has he said these things?\'94 Michael asked, horrified.\
  \'93So far only to a few intimates, but word has spread; they say he is preparing an open declaration, not immediately, perhaps in a few years. He is consulting his theologians. ...\'94\
\'93Ha ha!\'94 Jerome sneered as he ate.\
\'93And, more, it seems that he wants to go further and assert that nor will hell be open before that\
day ... not even for the devils!\'94\
\'93Lord Jesus, assist us!\'94 Jerome cried. \'93And what will we tell sinners, then, if we cannot threaten\
them with an immediate hell the moment they are dead?\'94\
\'93We are in the hands of a madman,\'94 Ubertino said. \'93But I do not understand why he wants to\
assert these things. ...\'94\
\'93The whole doctrine of indulgences goes up in smoke,\'94 Jerome complained, \'93and not even he\
will be able to sell any after that. Why should a priest who has committed the sin of bestiality pay so many gold pieces to avoid such a remote punishment?\'94\
\'93Not so remote,\'94 Ubertino said firmly. \'93The hour is at hand!\'94\
\
\
\
\
\
  \'93You know that, dear brother, but the simple do not know it. This is how things stand!\'94 cried Jerome, who no longer seemed to be enjoying his food. \'93What an evil idea; those preaching friars\
must have put it into his mind. ... Ah!\'94 And he shook his head.\
\'93But why?\'94 Michael of Cesena returned to this question.\
\'93I don\'92t believe there\'92s a reason,\'94 William said. \'93It\'92s a test he allows himself, an act of pride. He\
wants to be truly the one who decides for heaven and earth. I knew of these whisperings\'97William of Occam had written me. We shall see in the end whether the Pope has his way or the theologians\
have theirs, the voice of the whole church, the very wishes of the people of God, the bishops. \'85\'94 \'93Oh, on doctrinal matters he can bend even the theologians to his will,\'94 Michael said sadly.\
  \'93Not necessarily,\'94 William replied. \'93We live in times when those learned in divine things have no fear of proclaiming the Pope a heretic. Those learned in divine things are in their way the voice of\
the Christian people. And not even the Pope can set himself against them now.\'94\
\'93Worse, still worse,\'94 Michael murmured, frightened. \'93On one side a mad pope, on the other the\
people of God, who, even if through the words of His theologians, will soon claim to interpret Scripture freely. ...\'94\
\'93Why? Was what your people in Perugia did any different?\'94 William asked.\
Michael reacted as if stung. \'93That is why I want to meet the Pope. We can do nothing if he is not\
in agreement.\'94\
\'93We shall see, we shall see,\'94 William said in an enigmatic tone.\
  My master was truly very sharp. How could he foresee that Michael himself would later decide to support the theologians of the empire and to support the people in condemning the Pope? How\
could William foresee that, in four years\'92 time, when John was first to pronounce his incredible doctrine, there would be an uprising on the part of all Christianity? If the beatific vision was thus\
postponed, how could the dead intercede for the living? And what would become of the cult of the saints? It was the Minorites themselves who would open hostilities in condemning the Pope, and\
William of Occam would be in the front rank, stern and implacable in his arguments. The conflict was to last for three years, until John, close to death, made partial amends. I heard him described,\
years later, as he appeared in the consistory of December 1334, smaller than he had seemed previously, withered by age, eighty-five years old and dying, his face pale, and he was to say (the fox,\
so clever in playing on words not only to break his own oaths but also to deny his own stubborn- ness): \'93We confess and believe that the souls separated from the body and completely purified are in\
heaven, in paradise with the angels, and with Jesus Christ, and that they see God in His divine essence, clearly, face to face ...\'94 and then, after a pause\'97it was never known whether this was due\
to his difficulty in breathing or to his perverse desire to underline the last clause as adversative\'97\'93to the extent to which the state and condition of the separated soul allows it.\'94 The next morning, a\
Sunday, he had himself laid on a long chair with reclining back, and he received the cardinals, who kissed his hand, and he died.\
  But again I digress, and tell things other than those I should tell. Yet, after all, the rest of that conversation at table does not add much to the understanding of the events I am narrating. The\
Minorites agreed on the stand to be taken the next day. They sized up their adversaries one by one. They commented with concern on the news, announced by William, of the arrival of Bernard Gui.\
And even more on the fact that Cardinal Bertrand del Poggetto would be presiding over the Avignon legation. Two inquisitors were too many: a sign they planned to use the argument of heresy\
against the Minorites.\
\'93So much the worse,\'94 William said. \'93We will treat them as heretics.\'94\
  \'93No,  no,\'94  Michael  said,  \'93let  us  proceed  cautiously;  we  must  not  jeopardize  any  possible agreement.\'94\
\
\
\
\
\
  \'93As far as I can see,\'94 William said, \'93though I also worked for the realization of this meeting, and you know it, Michael, I do not believe the Avignonese are coming here to achieve any positive\
result. John wants you at Avignon alone, and without guarantees. But the meeting will have at least\
one function: to make you understand that. It would have been worse if you had gone there before having had this experience.\'94\
  \'93And so you have worked hard, and for many months, to bring about something you believe futile,\'94 Michael. said bitterly.\
  \'93I was asked to, by the Emperor and by you,\'94 William said. \'91And ultimately it is never a futile thing to know one\'92s enemies better.\'94\
  At this point they came to tell us that the second delegation was coming inside the walls. The Minorites rose and went out to meet the Pope\'92s men.\
}