{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf200
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 In which Salvatore tells of a prodigious spell.\
\
The supper for the legation was superb. The abbot must have known well both human weaknesses and  the  customs  of  the  papal  court  (which,  I  must  say,  did  not  displease  Brother  Michael\'92s\
Minorites, either). The freshly slaughtered pigs were to have produced blood pudding according to\
the Monte Cassino recipe, the cook had told us. But Venantius\'92s wretched end had obliged them to throw away all the pigs\'92 blood, though they would eventually slaughter some more pigs. I believe\
that in those days everyone abhorred the idea of killing the Lord\'92s creatures. Nevertheless, we had a ragout of pigeon, marinaded in the wine of those lands, and roast rabbit, Saint Clare\'92s pasties, rice\
with the almonds of those hills\'97the blanc-mange of fast days, that is\'97and borage tarts, stuffed olives, fried cheese, mutton with a sauce of raw peppers, white broad beans, and exquisite sweets,\
Saint Bernard\'92s cake, Saint Nicholas\'92s pies, Saint Lucy\'92s dumplings, and wines, and herb liqueurs that put everyone in a good humor, even Bernard Gui, usually so austere: an elixir of lemon verbena,\
walnut wine, wine against the gout, and gentian wine. It seemed an assembly of gluttons, except that every sip or every morsel was accompanied by devotional readings.\
  In the end, all rose very happy, some mentioning vague ailments as an excuse not to go down to compline. But the abbot did not take offense. Not all have the privilege and the obligations we\
assume on being consecrated in our order.\
As the monks departed, my curiosity made me linger in the kitchen, where they were preparing to\
lock up for the night. I saw Salvatore slip off toward the garden with a bundle under his arm. My curiosity  still  further  aroused,  I  followed and called  him. He  tried to  evade  me,  but when I\
questioned him he replied that in the bundle (which moved as if inhabited by something alive) he was carrying a basilisk.\
  \'93Cave basilischium! The rex of serpenti, tant pleno of poison that it all shines dehors! Che dicam, il veleno, even the stink comes dehors and kills you! Poisons you ... And it has black spots on his\
back, and a head like a coq, and half goes erect over the terra, and half on the terra like the other serpents. And it kills the bellula. ...\'94\
\'93The bellula?\'94\
\'93Oc! Parvissimum animal, just a bit plus longue than the rat, and also called the musk-rat. And so\
the serpe and the botta. And when they bite it, the bellula runs to the fenicula or to the cicerbita and chews it, and comes back to the battaglia. And they say it generates through the oculi, but most say\
they are wrong.\'94\
I asked him what he was doing with a basilisk and he said that was his business. Now completely\
overwhelmed by curiosity, I said that these days, with all the deaths, there could be no more secret matters, and I would tell William. Then Salvatore ardently begged me to remain silent, opened the\
bundle, and showed me a black cat. He drew me closer and, with an obscene smile, said that he didn\'92t want the cellarer, who was powerful, or me, young and handsome, to enjoy the love of the\
village girls any more, when he couldn\'92t because he was ugly and a poor wretch. But he knew a prodigious spell that would make every woman succumb to love. You had to kill a black cat and dig\
out its eyes, then put them in two eggs of a black hen, one eye in one egg, one eye in the other (and he showed me two eggs that he swore he had taken from appropriate hens). Then you had to let the eggs rot in a pile of horse dung (and he had one ready in a corner of the vegetable garden where nobody ever went), and there a little devil would be born from each egg, and would then be at your service, procuring for you all the delights of this world. But, alas, he told me, for the magic spell to\
\
\
\
\
\
work, the woman whose love he wanted had to spit on the eggs before they were buried in the dung, and that problem tormented him, because he would have to have the woman in question at hand\
that night, and make her perform the ritual without knowing its purpose.\
  A sudden heat seized me, in the face, or the viscera, or in my whole body, and I asked in a faint voice whether that night he would bring the same girl within the walls. He laughed, mocking me,\
and said I was truly gripped by a great lust (I said not, that I was asking out of pure curiosity), and then he said there were plenty of women in the village, and he would bring up another, even more\
beautiful than the one I liked. I supposed he was lying to me to make me go away. And in any case what could I have done? Follow him all night, when William was awaiting me for quite different\
enterprises? And again see her (if it was she) toward whom my appetites drove me while my reason drove me away\'97and whom I should never see again even though I did desire to see her further?\
Surely not. So I persuaded myself that Salvatore was telling the truth, as far as the woman was concerned. Or perhaps he was lying about everything, and the spell he described was a fantasy of his\
na\'efve, superstitious mind, and he would not do anything.\
I became irritated with him, treated him roughly, told him that for that night he would do better\
to go to bed, because archers were patrolling the abbey. He answered that he knew the abbey better than the archers did, and with this fog nobody would see anybody. Indeed, he said to me, I\'92m going\
to run off now, and you won\'92t see me any more, even if I were two feet away having my pleasure with the girl you desire. He expressed himself with different words, but this was the meaning of\
what he said. I left, indignant, because it was unworthy of me, nobleman and novice, to dispute with such rabble.\
  I joined William and we did what was to be done. That is, we prepared to follow compline at the rear of the nave, so that when the office ended we would be ready to undertake our second (for me,\
third) journey into the bowels of the labyrinth.\
\
}